[Music]
and and what they have tried to insert
into this city. So, I want to say thank
you to every single person that has been
able to do this.
>> Hands up. Hands up.
>> I'm Senator Alex Padilla. I have
questions for the secretary.
>> This video went viral in June.
>> Hands on your back.
>> My hands. Go ahead. Behind my back.
>> All right. hand, please.
>> Senator Alex Padilla's violent removal
at this press conference happened in the
middle of the LA protests against
President Trump's immigration policies.
[Music]
>> Oh my god.
>> The son of Mexican immigrants, Padilla
was appointed to the Senate when Kla
Harris left her seat in 2021, making him
the first Latino senator in California's
history. And he's since been elected to
a full six-year term. His state is now
at the center of debates over free
speech, states rights, and
redistricting, just to name a few.
Padilla and I sat down right before the
government shutdown. I wanted to ask him
about all of it and if he might be
considering a run for governor next
year. Here's my conversation with
Senator Alex Padilla.
[Music]
Senator Padilla, thank you so much for
joining the interview. I really
appreciate your time today.
>> Thank you for uh for inviting me. Happy
to be here. Um, I wanted to talk to you
because California obviously is at the
center of so much right now in our
current conversation. Immigration, state
power, redistricting. I'll also add um,
you know, this is a very tense time I
think for Democrats across the country.
I'd like to start though with a moment
that I think surprised a lot of people
who know you very well because you're
not exactly known as a rabble rouser. On
June 12th, you were briefly handcuffed
after trying to ask a question to
Secretary of Homeland Security Christine
Gnome at a press conference she was
giving in LA. Uh the context was this
was during um significant protests
against ICE in the city.
Can you take me back to that moment? Why
did you interrupt her remarks? What was
going on?
>> Yeah. Well, there was um never would I
have have imagined that that would have
happened that that would be a response
to a question, especially to a senator
trying to ask a question. The moment in
Los Angeles was the militarization of
the city of Los Angeles, um without a
clear sort of mission, defined
objective, etc., uh or justification
that had been communicated to Congress,
let alone the public. And so after
numerous attempts to try to obtain that
information uh here in Congress in
committee hearings via formal inquiries
uh with no response, I finally had a a
scheduled briefing which took place in a
federal building. That's why I was in
the building to begin with. So I think
that's important for people to to
understand. And when as I was waiting in
the conference room for the folks who
were going to brief me, uh we learned
that Secretary Gnome was about to have a
press conference down the hall. And my
briefing was now delayed. And so I asked
if I could listen in um while we were
waiting to see if there was any new
information that would be provided. And
when Secretary Anome says that the the
mission
was to liberate the people of Los
Angeles, to liberate the people of
California from their dulyeleed leaders,
I felt compelled to speak up uh and to
try to ask some specific questions. Uh
but before I can get a few words out, I
mean, you saw what the reaction was. And
so for me, it was important for a couple
of reasons. Uh, one was not just what
didn't didn't or didn't happen during
that press conference cuz surprise
surprise the administration immediately
tried to put out lies and and
disinformation that I had not introduced
myself or identified myself that I
barged in, etc. Nothing could be further
from the truth. But I think more
fundamentally, the way the Trump
administration had gone about
militarizing the city of Los Angeles
laid the groundwork for being able to do
that anywhere in the country on any
issue. Right? And now we here we are uh
months later looking back at their
numerous numerous efforts as trying to
quelch dissent. They don't like anybody
who disagrees with what they're trying
to do. Uh but Los Angeles was u sort of
the first domino to fall, if you will.
>> The secretary and you talked afterwards.
What was that conversation like? I mean,
did she apologize?
>> Uh no apology, but uh honestly not not
surprised. Uh just given how this
administration tends to carry itself. Um
I wish I could say it was more
substantive or more constructive. Uh she
finally did say, "Well, I understand
you're asking for more information. You
know, what's what's your question?" And
among the questions that we had is, you
know, that for all their talk about
dangerous violent criminals, if all this
administration was doing was targeting,
arresting and even deporting dangerous
violent criminals, there would be no
debate. There would be no discussion
there because there would be no
disagreement. But we had been hearing
anecdotally up until that point that
that was far from the case of what was
happening on the ground, what was
happening in the streets of Southern
California. that the because we kept
hearing story after story of uh people
with no uh violent criminal history
being rounded up. And so I wanted to get
some statistics. I wanted to ask the
secretary, you know, you put three, four
or five names up on a slideshow during a
press conference, but who are the dozens
and dozens of others that have been
detained, that have been arrested? Uh
we've come since to learn that the vast
majority of people being caught up in
these indiscriminate raids, and we
should talk about that here for a
minute.
>> We will in a minute,
>> don't have a violent criminal history.
And so who are they? They may be
undocumented for a number of reasons. A
lot of people who are undocumented came
with TPS, right, temporary protective
status, and Donald Trump has taken that
away. Or maybe they came initially on a
work visa and overstayed that visa. It's
not always people who came here
unlawfully, but they find themselves
after years, if not decades, of working,
paying taxes, raising families here, the
target of these indiscriminate rates.
>> I want to talk about im immigration
certainly and what's happening in
California. I want to stick with you
though for a moment. You were very
emotional afterwards. You spoke very
passionately about what had happened. We
also saw Vice President JD Vance um when
referring to you and that incident uh
used the wrong name. He called you Jose
Padyia. How did you understand that
misnaming of you?
>> Yeah. Um sa sadly not surprised because
this is how petty this administration
is. not just Trump, not just Vance. It's
the the culture that they have created
uh for themselves. And I knew what he
was trying to do, right? To to call a
Latino man Jose flippantly. That's their
way of trying to ridicule us. Um you
know, for uh Vice President Vance in
particular, right? Let's remember who uh
Jesus's parents were. They were Jose and
Maria, uh Joseph and Mary. Uh, but for
Latinos, look, I take it as a point of I
turn it around. Uh, cuz I know a lot of
Josees, a lot of are hard workers. Uh,
so if that's what you're going to call
me, then I'm going to wear it as a point
of pride. Um, but back to the the the
press conference, uh, and what happened,
as shaken up as I was, because that was
quite the experience,
um, it was clear to me that if that's
how this administration would respond to
a senator with a question, imagine not
just how they could treat so many other
people, but how they are treating so
many other people when the cameras are
not on. This should be a wakeup call.
Uh, and it started in Los Angeles. We've
seen National Guard troops now roving
the streets of Washington DC. Threats to
um uh now uh be sent into Portland or
Memphis or San Francisco or New York.
This is a very very heady time for our
country. Uh
>> what I'm hearing you say is that you
felt that what happened to you is sort
of the can to what happened in Los
Angeles was the sort of canary in the
coal mine. that the way that they were
treating a US senator who's Latino is um
emblematic of of a wider um attitude and
and objective
>> without a doubt. Without a doubt. And
again, going back to the press
conference, as I mentioned, we were an
FBI office in a federal building and
they knew who I was. I had an escort
from the moment I entered the front
door. They knew who I was.
>> And you think it was deliberate or do
you think it was a mistake?
>> Uh
at a minimum it was a hell of an
overreaction. Um, but they knew who I
was. Just like Vice President Vance
knows my name. Uh, but he chose to call
me Jose. We served together for two
years in the Senate for Christ's sake.
He knows who I am, but it's it's the way
they choose to go about things.
>> I was thinking about this in the context
of
your own
upbringing, how you got into politics,
um, and the things that drew you into,
um, this work. Uh because I think there
is a throughine there. You grew up in
the San Frernando Valley. Your parents
immigrated from Mexico. Uh they were
workingass. Your dad was a short order
cook. Your mom was a housekeeper. Why
did they come to the US and what did
they want for you?
>> Yeah. So um uh you got the beginnings.
Perfect. My father's from the state of
Halisco. My mother was from the state of
Chihuahua. They came separately to Los
Angeles. They met. They fell in love.
They decided to get married. and they
applied for green cards in that order.
Uh, and I thank the United States
government every day for saying yes to
those applications because you can
imagine if they would have been denied
my life journey opportunities in life
would be very different for me than what
they have been. But they uh uh became
legal residents. Uh, and you're right,
for 40 years my dad worked as a short
order cook. So I uh when I speak at
colleges and high schools, I remind the
kids like when you go out to a diner and
think of who's scrambling the eggs,
who's flipping the pancakes. That's what
my dad did for 40 years to provide for
us. And for the same 40 years, my mom
used to clean houses on their modest
incomes. They raised three of us. And I
have vivid memories of my dad
interrupting me studying or doing my
homework and telling me in Spanish
[Music]
>> saying, "I want you to work with your
mind and not with your back."
>> Right. Right. And there's a lot of uh
honor in manual labor, but that was his
way of saying, "I want better for you."
And um and so I thought, "Okay,
academically, what what do I like? I I
used to like math, somehow did well in
science." So the advice and counsel you
get from teachers and others is you got
to be an engineer.
>> And you ended up going to MIT and you
studied engineering.
>> And despite some great schools in
California, I was introduced to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
And so years before www. anything, you
know, I sent off a letter requesting an
application, got on the mailing list. Uh
and by the time the acceptance letter
came, I knew that I would have to go for
two reasons. Uh, number one, yes, it was
a chance of a lifetime for me, but also
talk about the fulfillment of my
parents' dreams. So, I went spent four
cold winters in Massachusetts. Uh, came
back with a mechanical engineering
degree. Uh, kind of ready to start my
career.
>> You got drawn though into politics um
instead of actually um going into
engineering. And and so that was the
setup because think of the the
excitement, the enthusiasm, and the
emotion. Graduating from MIT, returning
home, parents are proud. And what do I
see on television? The year was 1994.
Republican governor of California at the
time, Pete Wilson, was up for
reelection, down in the polls,
championing this Proposition 187, which
sought to make immigrant families no
longer eligible for public services. And
what was it about that that drew you
into politics when you were watching?
>> The cruelty of the message. The cruelty
of the message. The imagery of kind of
people, you know, crossing the border in
big numbers. Uh the the the language,
the scapegoating, the demonizing of
immigrants. He was talking about my
family. He was talking about my
community. And it was offensive. And it
was it was enraging. And I realized,
look, that engineering degree looks nice
on the wall. and and I'll at some point
come back to that. But right now, I have
to get involved. This is my home. And if
I want California to move in a better
direction morally, I can't just sit back
and wait for others to do it. I hadn't
really been involved in electoral
politics up until that point, but I knew
that I I could either try to be a part
of it or not. And I chose to be a part
of it.
>> And in fact, you were elected to LA City
Council in 1999 at the age of only 26.
>> Yeah. And 5 years later, after a little
bit of organizing, some voter
registration drives, managing some
political campaigns, I finally chose to
run for office myself.
>> I want to stay with Prop 187 because it
passed, but it never took effect because
of legal challenges.
>> Um, however, that particular fight is
really credited with giving Democrats
their super majority in the state
because Latinos were activated in a huge
way um for many years and you're the
perfect example of that. So in that
context, I'm wondering how you look at
the legacy of Prop 187 now and that
fight because over the years, you know,
the Democratic Party ended up taking
more liberal stances on immigration.
Do you think that Democrats took the
wrong lessons from those debates?
>> Um, I don't think so. Maybe maybe
they're not done reading the lesson
plan. M uh you know just another one
final note on the proposition itself to
underscore the cruelty of it. There was
a clause that would have required school
personnel to report to the authorities
anybody they suspected of being
undocumented. Really turning teachers
and counselors and school personnel into
immigration officers. That's how bad it
was. Part of the reason why it never
went into effect. It was deemed
unconstitutional. But it was a heck of a
wakeup call. And not just for my
generation of young people at the time
deciding, hey, we got to get involved
somehow. Some people became activists,
some advocates, some of us ran for
office, but also for people like my
parents, right? Countless numbers of
Californians at the time. My parents
legal residents, mind you, but with no
sense of urgency or desire to become
citizens. And finally, they did so. and
not just to sort of protect themselves,
but so that they could register to vote
and they could have a say in our
democracy. And huge numbers of people
like them did that fundamentally
changing the electorate in California.
And as a result, not just who our
representatives are, but the political
priorities and the political agenda uh
at all levels, the the congressional
delegation, uh state house leadership in
counties and cities throughout the
state. I I hear you saying that it, you
know, really was a wakeup call for
everyone um that they needed to engage
in the political project um around
immigration and California.
But we're still having those debates
today. And part of the lesson one could
say of Prop 187 now is that it was
really popular. Um it passed in
California. people actually wanted to
implement some of the things that were
in that um law.
>> But but think about that it was popular.
It was deemed unconstitutional
>> and what prevailed the constitution,
>> right? That's an important lesson. But
as you know, we are having a wider
conversation in this country um after
the election of Donald Trump on what was
a very clearly anti-immigrant platform
about what we owe our undocumented
community. There is a lot of opposition
in this country to giving people who are
here illegally access to the sames
rights and privileges that people who
are citizens of this country have.
Aren't you worried that Democrats have
sort of lost the argument on this?
>> No, I think actually I I think the
question may be too narrow, but I think
the real question is not just what do we
owe undocumented or what do we owe legal
immigrants or like what do we owe
America? We owe America a much better
immigration system than we have today.
Our immigration system is outdated. It
needs to be modernized. Uh and let's
understand the various components of it.
Democrats and Republicans agree we need
a safe, secure, humane, orderly southern
border of the United States.
That's that's one element of it. Second,
let's ask ourselves, does everybody who
want to come to United States deserve to
just be able to come uh no matter what?
Of course not. But our systems of being
able to come on a work visa, on a
student visa, to seek asylum, etc.,
those are outdated. They need to be
modernized. And at times there's
actually substantive conversation
negotiations around how to do that. But
what gets lost in the conversation. What
too many of my colleagues seem to seem
to quickly forget is the millions of
people who not just are here but have
been here for years, in some cases
decades, working, paying taxes, raising
families, uh purchasing homes, and are
an integral part of communities across
the country. If you're otherwise
law-abiding, right, not the dangerous,
violent criminals that Trump likes to
talk about, but if you're otherwise law-
abiding, I believe they deserve an
opportunity to come out of the shadows
and take a step towards legal status.
That notion is widely supported by
Democrats and Republicans and
independents across the board.
Unfortunately, just not at this moment
in the halls of Congress. Then I wonder
what you make of
in the last election a very clear
discussion um by Vice President Vance um
articulated to me when I interviewed him
and the president that uh illegal
immigration is a drain on this country
that it is taking away jobs from
Americans.
And that message not only resonated
among swasts of the population, but it
also res resonated among Latinos. I
mean, we saw Latinos take a big swing to
the right. And
you know, it doesn't seem like um
that message um from you, from others
resonated. Why do you think that is?
>> So, a couple of things. I mean, I think
uh number one, I disagree with the big
swing to the right. I think there was
some uh element of the Latino vote uh
that swing to the right, more men than
women, but a bigger swing to sitting it
out. And we can look at the numbers of
turnout. Turnout was down this last
election. So yes, Democrats have a lot
of work to do a to uh win back some
voters that maybe went Republican this
last election, but also had to re-engage
a lot of voters that decided to sit it
out. That that's one. Uh number uh two,
um what Trump and Vance campaigned a lot
on was this emphasis on those dangerous
violent criminals. I can't tell you how
many times I've heard, not just in
California, especially in California,
but from across the country, voters
saying, "This isn't what I signed up
for." They knew Trump talked a lot about
immigration during the course of the
campaign, but the cruelty of this
indiscrim these indiscriminate raids,
the racial profiling supported by the
Supreme Court, my god, saying yes,
somebody's appearance alone is enough to
arrest or detain somebody, somebody's
accent or their perceived occupation.
That's wrong. You cannot enforce the law
by breaking the law. Part of the reason
I think it's been pretty well shown that
there was this move to the right by
Latinos and others more broadly was
because of what happened on the border
um under President Biden. Over 250,000
encounters a month at its height. I
think there's no question that the
measures that President Trump has taken
have been effective. You opposed asylum
restrictions at the border under
President Biden.
I'm just wondering
If you look back now and you think
perhaps you might have taken a different
stand on that debate.
>> Well, what I was waiting for at the
moment when those uh proposals came up
for votes. Uh what was missing then and
what's missing now is okay. Now, now
what? Because I've had so many
conversations with my colleagues, both
sides of the aisle, by the way, not just
Democrats talking to Democrats, but me
talking to Republicans,
and they tell me in private, "Alex,
dreamers deserve better." I'm with you
on that. But first, we have to get the
border under control. Farm workers, they
deserve better. We rely on them. They
they help feed the nation. But first, we
have to get the border under control.
Okay. So, you're telling me that based
on the numbers, the border is now under
control. Now, what? Now, now where's the
assistance for the dreamers and the farm
workers and so many others?
>> But I want to say in 2024 because you
voted alongside your Republican
colleagues to kill the bipartisan border
security bill um that President Biden
had championed and Senator Langford,
whom I also interviewed um had helped
craft along with um Democrats. And you
not only joined Republicans, but you
also helped change the minds of some of
your fellow Democratic senators for the
reasons that you say that this bill did
not um allow any sort of path to
legalization for dreamers or do
anything, you know, more broadly um for
our immigration system.
And I guess I'm wondering now, would you
make the same decision to vote against
the bill knowing the result?
Because perhaps if that bill had passed
and given
more security at the border, Democrats
might have not lost so badly. It might
have not given President Trump, you
know, what was a very very useful um
issue for him. on policy. I still stand
by my vote uh because there was no
recognition and no no willingness to
commit to some relief or assistance for
dreamers, essential workers more broadly
uh etc. Number one. Number two, when it
comes to the takeaways from the
election, not gonna say immigration
has an issue in policy,
but in politics,
>> I would argue
>> as a political matter, do you think you
did the right
>> I would argue that in the election,
economic anxiety played a larger role
than uh just the situation at the
southern border.
>> I understand as a as a policy matter,
but as a political matter, do you think
you made the right choice in in helping
to kill that bipartisan bill? Yeah,
because the the political leverage that
I have
I am going to utilize to keep advancing
the need to do better by dreamers, by
farm workers, by essential workers more
broadly and so many others that deserve
to come out of the shadows.
>> Do you think the border as it is now um
the restrictions that are there should
remain there? I think there's a I know
the numbers are the numbers, but there's
a much smarter way to go about
maintaining a a secure, humane, orderly
southern border. Uh it does need a lot
of investment. Uh but experience tells
us that it's not just how many more
border patrol officers and how many more
ICE agents we need to hire. Let's invest
in technology, surveillance technology,
screening technology at ports of entry.
if the concern as they've painted it and
and I partially agree it's not just
people who come but if it's um uh drugs
or other uh
>> it's the asylum system I mean the thing
that's really
>> and that's part of what needs to be
updated that's what I'm saying but the
asylum system itself why are people
coming here to seek asylum is what's
happening in their home countries and
what's the role or opportunity if not
responsibility for the United States to
engage not just the country of Mexico
but other partner countries throughout
the hemisphere here to address the
migration flow. People only come here if
they're desperate and need feel the need
to leave their hometowns. If they had
more opportunity, more hope, they
wouldn't want to be coming here to begin
with. That's in our interest.
>> Senator, I have walked with migrants
coming up through Mexico. I I have seen
those who have come here because they
um need asylum because horrific things
have happened to them. I've also walked
with those who have come here um because
they want more economic opportunity. Um
they see America as a place that you can
work and get ahead um as opposed to
their own countries. And so, you know,
the asylum system
as it had operated
put those two people together and gave
them access to this country regardless.
And so, I I think when I think when I
hear people talk about this issue, they
get frustrated with Democrats because
they also know the distinction, right?
They know that the asylum system didn't
work and it feels out of control. So,
let's talk about both of them. As you
labeled it, there's the asylum category
and there's the people searching for
economic opportunity category, the
asylum category. To deal with that
properly, to to maintain sort of to do
consideration, to be able to grant
asylum for those who truly warrant it,
we need more immigration judges. We need
more hearing officers. We need more of
the capacity in that system to make
those determinations more quickly. So
people get their answer yes or no in a
matter of days or weeks, not months or
years. But this administration has
starved
uh those departments and agencies of the
resources necessary to do so. So the
backlogs are only getting worse. Now to
the category of people wanting to come
for economic opportunity. Again, not
everybody who just wants to come to the
United States should be able to
automatically. But I do hear from a lot
of business leaders who are looking for
more workers. And I would imagine with
record sustained low unemployment, at
least that was the case up until a few
months ago, that u maybe there's a way
to match people wanting to work with
people looking for workers. So, we're
now in a situation and you've made it
very clear that you oppose a lot of what
is happening with mass deportations and
and the project that we're seeing across
this country. Uh I am wondering since
you got your start in politics uh at a
difficult moment of protest against
immigration, what are you seeing in
terms of how the community is responding
to this moment?
>> Yeah. Well, first of all, let me
recognize that the fear in a lot of
communities is very, very real. There's
a lot of terror being felt in
communities throughout California and
and far beyond. And when I say the fear
is real, I mean, you can see it in the
economic impact. When you go to
restaurants, it used to be bustling
every day in the lunch hour, now half
full, maybe in part because work, some
workers are afraid to go to work. A lot
of people are afraid to go out uh
because these rates can take place
anywhere. They've taken place not just
at Home Depot and construction sites.
This administration has chosen to try to
conduct these raids in hospitals, in
schools, in churches, houses of worship
really cuz that's where the worst of the
worst tends to hang out. So, it's having
that real world impact. Uh, but I say
the the courage to stand up and speak up
is is impressive. that has to continue
because this administration is out of
control.
>> I'd also like to ask you about
California's new no secret police act
which bans some federal law enforcement
from wearing masks in many situations.
This is going to pit state law against
federal law. I mean because essentially
federal lawmakers and the administration
are saying they have a right to mask.
this protects their identity um from
people filming them, from those who
might want to dox them, etc. while
they're just doing their job. Who do you
think federal law enforcement is
supposed to listen to? I mean, and what
if they don't comply?
>> It may very well end up in in the courts
and maybe it'll take some time to hash
out, but in the meantime, whether it's a
city, whether it's a state dictating the
rules of law enforcement in their
particular jurisdiction, I believe that
is valid. Number one. Number two, it's
important to remember like this uh
requirement of identifying yourself, of
not being masked, you know, with certain
uh necessary exemptions to it. It's not
a new concept. Other federal law
enforcement agencies are required to do
so. State law enforcement agencies are
required to do so. Local police
departments and sheriff departments
around the country are required to do
so. So, how is it that they can go about
their law enforcement, public safety
duties while identifying themselves, not
having to mask up, etc., and ICE
doesn't?
>> Before we move on from immigration, I do
want to circle back to the dreamers, uh,
because this is an issue that has had
bipartisan support, and this
administration has made it pretty clear
that, um, they would like to see the
dreamers self-epport, as they put it.
One of the frustrations I've heard from
Democrats in particular on this issue is
that why hasn't Democratic leadership
when they have had the opportunity to
actually make inroads on something that
is popular broadly? Why haven't they
been able to actually help the dreamers?
>> Look, I I I share the frustration. Uh I
can't speak to what the Senate Senate
did or didn't do prior to my joining the
Senate in January of 2021. Um and sadly
knowing the rules of the Senate now
you need bipartisan support to to move
that measure forward. The encouraging
thing is dreamers do enjoy bipartisan
support. The the dream act as uh
introduced in a number of congresses
have had Republican names on the bill
itself. Uh but ever since, you know,
Trump, you have too many Republicans
afraid to even do that publicly, to
support dreamers publicly, let alone
cast a vote uh to to give relief to the
people that they know deserve it. Um to
it is absolutely frustrating. Uh but
we're going to keep pressing because
those dreamers deserve nothing less. Um,
and to remind them who it is that's
keeping them from having that certainty
that they need, whether it's who's not
willing to vote for it because Donald
Trump tells them no, or who it is that's
challenging in a court, it's
Republicans.
>> Do you think Democrats are afraid of
talking about immigration now because of
the climate? Because I mean, I have to
say even
some of your fellow senators who are
Latino, this isn't an an issue that they
have been standing front and center on.
I'm actually sensing the opposite right
now uh because of the overreach of this
administration because the activity is
on the uptick um in a lot of parts of
the country and they're now realizing
hearing the stories right it's one thing
to talk about immigration broadly or
talk about statistics generally but most
people when you stop and think about it
you know somebody you know somebody you
know one two degrees of separation maybe
uh and there's a real world impact for
the the fear that's out there.
>> So, I want to talk about another
national debate that is
Californiaentric, which is
redistricting. Um, Trump has pushed a
wave of redistricting in GOPled states
that may mean more Republican
congressional seats. Started in Texas,
it's moved beyond. In response,
California has put forth a ballot
initiative known as Prop 50. Uh, and
that's going to be voted on in November.
and that would temporarily redraw
California's map and possibly add up to
five Democratic seats. And a lot of
Democrats are happy to see Democrats
employ this strategy. But of course,
as we know, endless gerrymandering is
bad for democracy. Uh it leads to a more
polarized Congress because people are in
safe seats, so they don't feel like they
need to work across the aisle to advance
legislation that perhaps the other side
might want to advance.
You used to be against gerrymandering.
Uh you're in support of the measure now.
So can you explain to me your thinking
on this?
>> Sure. Well, let's make a couple things
very very clear. Uh number one, uh we
would not be here if it wasn't for the
fact that Donald Trump called Governor
Abbott in Texas and said five me find me
five more Republican seats. In a very
similar way that he called the Secretary
of State in Georgia after losing the
2020 election saying find me 11,000 more
votes. uh not just Trump making the
call, but the governor and the
legislative leadership of Texas saying,
"Yes, sir. That's the only reason
California is doing what it's doing." I
agree. Uh in redistricting should be
independent. Should happen only once
every 10 years after the census in all
50 states. That's the ideal scenario.
But that's not what's happening here.
And the reason they're doing that, I
mean, let's look at a bigger picture.
Under normal times, a political party in
power would be more than happy to run on
their record
in the next election and seek to stay in
power. Right? Republicans have the
majority of the House, the Senate, and
they occupy the White House. Their
record has been so bad for American
families that they're running from it.
So, the only chance they have at holding
on to power is to rig the election
before it even starts. And because the
House majority is so thin, so narrow,
their only way to try to hold on to
their majority is to do this partisan
redistricting. California would not
normally do this, but the stakes are so
high because of the damage and
destructiveness of this administration.
California is fighting back. Absolutely.
Because you know that it started in
Texas and it's not going to end there.
You hear the chatter in Indiana, in
Missouri, in Florida, Ohio. Uh,
Republicans are playing hard ball and
Democrats need to do the same.
>> I want to move to Congress briefly
because as we're speaking today is
Monday. Uh, the government looks like it
might shut down uh tomorrow because
Democrats aren't going to vote to fund
the government over issues to do with
healthcare. Um, it's a risky move
politically. Uh, having seen other
shutdowns, it really uh can go either
way as to who the population blames.
They are generally speaking unpopular.
>> In a similar moment in March, I spoke to
Chuck Schumer
and he changed his mind at the last
minute on this issue about a shutdown
and voted with Republicans to keep the
government open with the rationale that
it was going to hurt the American
people, that it would hurt the um
federal workforce.
What is your understanding of what has
changed this time around?
>> Here's the one of the most significant
things that has changed since March. Um
maybe some of my colleagues took
Republicans that there were that will
continue to negotiate in good faith and
work on these issues.
That continuing resolution, right, keep
the government funded and going was met
in a matter of months with both a budget
reconciliation bill and a budget
recisions bill. Unilateral partisan cuts
to the budget. So, how do you go back
into the next round of budget
negotiations and say, "Let's do this
bipartisan. Let's do this in good faith
knowing that there is a 100% chance that
Republicans will come back in a matter
of weeks uh or maybe a couple of months
when Donald Trump tells them to and and
unilaterally cut Democratic priorities
and only keep Republican priorities
intact. We need some reassurances
that they will honor whatever deal is
made starting with addressing this
health care uh cost spike that's about
to hit uh people across the country.
Look, there's no good option here. Uh on
the one hand uh I know who shut downs
hurt the most. It's the most vulnerable
uh in our country. Uh nobody wishes
that. uh but also know that who's been
hurt systematically since the beginning
of this administration is the most
vulnerable uh in our country. So
something's got to change. We have to
exercise any leverage point to try to
reel this administration in and protect
what safeguards uh we have. It's real
simple. It's real simple. Okay.
>> Republicans occupy the White House. They
have majorities in both houses. It's
incumbent upon them if they wanted to
keep the government open, they know how
to do that. They're choosing not to.
They would rather shut down the
government than work with Democrats to
address rising health care costs. But
that's not a shocker to me,
unfortunately.
>> On the other side, though, Democrats and
Democratic leadership is also incredibly
unpopular among Democrats. I mean, this
is a problem of both parties in that
there is a real lack of faith in the
leadership across the board in Congress.
And I'm wondering as a Democrat who sees
the poll numbers, sees what people are
saying that this is a party that's
broken, that the leadership of Chuck
Schumer, Hakee Jeff is not meeting the
moment, what you would say to them.
Yeah, I I think you know the moment is
the moment. Let's just look back over
the course of a couple of years and see
what's happened because it's been by and
large the same Democratic leadership
that passed the measures that got us got
us out of the co9 pandemic. It's by and
large the same Democratic leadership
that uh helped us pass the inflation
reduction act, the bipartisan
infrastructure law, the chips and
science act
democratic leaders in Congress. So,
we're dealing with a different president
right now. And why? Because, yeah, we we
had a tough election cycle last year.
I'm not saying that's not the case. But
I think the the the values and the
principles are still there. And it's a
lot harder uh to push for them from the
position of being in the minority, but
we are. And people need to see that. I
think early in the year, maybe
unhappy with Chuck Schumer. They're very
unhappy with Hakee Jeff. They're very
unhappy with the Democrat Democratic
leadership. Maybe earlier in the year
they didn't see the fight as there uh as
it was. It's more there now and they're
seeing it more now. It's got it's going
hand in hand. Like when people ask me
what can Democrats do? What can
Democrats do? Look, we're we're pushing
trying to find these leverage points
being in the minority in Congress.
That's important, but it's not it in
isolation. Look at what attorneys
general and other uh organizations
across the country are doing in terms of
litigation, suing this administration at
every turn because of their overreach.
But the most important thing that we can
do as Democrats is to continue to
organize and mobilize not just in
anticipation of the next midterm
elections in California. It's all about
Proposition 50. The stakes are high, not
just for the people of California, but
for the country,
>> you know.
Staying in this vein, in many ways,
California has sort of become this
resistance state, right? It is the
epicenter as we've discuss as we've
discussed to much of the opposition to
President Trump, whether it be
immigration or anything else and
>> or healthare or environmental protection
or
>> all the things. And I'm just wondering
if you think that positioning of
California as a sort of resistance state
is the best thing for the state because
you know fire season, you also have the
possibility of earthquakes.
Will the federal government be there the
next time you need them? Is
California's position as a state that is
really so visibly um standing up in the
face of Trump's agenda the right thing
for the people of California.
>> Right. I I first of all, yes, I believe
so. But thankfully, I've had Republican
colleagues stand up and say the same. We
should not politicize uh disaster aid
because that's not, you know, good for
California. It's not good for Florida.
It's not good for the Carolinas. It's
not good for Texas. Not good for
anybody. So, I I think the aid will be
there at the end of the day because um
of that bipartisan respons
responsibility. But I want to make it
clear, it's not resistance for the sake
of just resistance. It's resistance
because we know the bad policies, the
harm that this administration is
championing, but also the better path
forward.
>> I want to end um by asking uh about your
own political ambitions, which uh many
people are talking about your future.
I'm sure you know Governor Newsome is
term limited. Uh the race to replace him
uh next year is heating up. Um you're
close to the governor. uh he appointed
you to the Senate in the first place.
And in speaking to people in California
who know a lot more uh than I do, they
say that you have a real possibility of
winning should you uh put your hat into
the ring. Now, you haven't made an
announcement yet. So, I'm wondering if
you'd like to make it now.
>> There won't be any such announcement uh
happening right now. But uh look,
California is home. I love California.
Miss California when I'm in Washington.
Um, and there's a lot of important work
to do there and we talked about some of
the issues earlier whether it's economic
opportunity for Californians, the future
of health care, future of education
system, uh, on and on and on. Uh, but I
also know California plays an important
role in the national dialogue. So,
I'm enjoying being a senator. Tough
times right now, uh, but important. I I
I see how some people can find the
position of governor of California is
attractive in advancing a lot of those
same issues. And I'm just trying to
think through where can I be most
impactful,
not just short-term, but midterm and
long-term. Is it from here? Is it from
there? and or do I have a role uh to
play here in shifting how Democrats look
at some of the issues including but not
limited to immigration or look to you
know some of the the diversity that's
out there including but not limited to
the Latino community as a way of
continuing to build uh strong political
momentum for a better future for our
country.
>> So you're weighing it. Uh I am weighing
it but focus first and foremost on
encouraging people to vote for
Proposition 50. The other decision the
that race is not until next year. So
that decision will come.
>> Senator Balia, thank you so much for
your time. I appreciate it.
>> Thank you. Thank you.
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro
>> and I'm David Maresy
>> and we're the hosts of the interview an
audio and video podcast from the New
York Times. Every week we interview
fascinating and influential people from
all walks of life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.